Programify feature gate (#1)
buffalojoec/solana-improvement-documents: proposals/0077-programify-feature-gate.md

---
simd: '0077'
title: Programify Feature Gate Program
authors:
  - Joe Caulfield
  - Tyera Eulberg
category: Standard
type: Core
status: Draft
created: 2023-10-26
feature: #33547
---

## Summary

### Roadmap

> This is SIMD 1/3 required for **Multi-Client Feature Gates**. See

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is SIMD 1/3 expected for **Multi-Client Feature Gates**. See
```

<https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/issues/76>

**Goals:**

- Decentralized control over queuing new runtime features
- Automatic feature activation selection based on stake weight with supporting
  software

> - Decentralized governance of the mechanism itself

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Decentralized control of the mechanism itself
```
Maybe? Just because governance kind of means a particular thing, in the crypto worls

**Resulting Architecture:**

1. 👉 **Feature Creation:** Features can be created by anyone. Each is owned by
  an upgradeable BPF program at `Feature111111111111111111111111111111111111`
2. **Feature Queuing:** A governance process nominates features that should be
  queued for activation
3. **Feature Recognition & Activation:** Features are activated based on stake
  support of nodes who recognize the feature in their software version

### Proposal

This SIMD outlines a proposal to replace the non-existent system account at
address `Feature111111111111111111111111111111111111`, which is the owner of
all feature accounts, with an upgradeable BPF program.

It defines the program's initial functionality - which consists solely of the
capability to revoke pending feature activations - and an accompanying

> governance system for managing upgrades of the program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
capability to revoke pending feature activations - and an initial
governance system for managing upgrades of the program.
```
I think we should say this is just the starting approach, as validators may wish to control this with formal governance at some point in the future.
Also, I feel like the phrase "governance system" might imply something broader than a simple multisig. Is there a different phrase we could use here?

Author: Upgrade control process?

Author: I've replaced "governance system" with "upgrade control process" for now.

Important note: the process by which core contributors *activate* features
would remain completely unchanged by this SIMD.

## Motivation

> 

Reviewer: I think I would start the Motivation section by discussing why we want a Feature-Gate BPF program: namely, that the complete Multi-Client Feature Gate architecture will require several changes to how feature accounts are handled, and the most obvious approach is to put a program in charge of this account handling. A BPF program (as opposed to a native one, comment on this to come later) makes sense because it comes with a built in system for upgrades.

> Sometimes, a feature that has been queued for activation may need to be
> revoked. For numerous reasons, a pending feature could suddenly become unsafe
> or otherwise non-desirable. The ability to revoke these pending features is
> paramount to secure, frictionless engineering processes and protecting the
> network’s stability.
> 
> The best way to manage such a capability is to ensure all feature accounts are
> owned by a program, which has the authority to clear a feature account’s data
> and remove its lamports, effectively revoking it from activation.
> 
> Such a program surely presents a security risk if the upgrade authority is not
> carefully handled, so a proper governance process is required for this program
> to exist.

Reviewer: I thought this section could maybe bridge the BPF-program motivation I mentioned above and the "current state of things" you include in the design section below. What do you think? (Needs line wrapping)

```suggestion
Currently, a feature is queued for activation by a keypair holder creating an empty account and assigning it to the `Feature111111111111111111111111111111111111` program. Because there is no actual program at that address, the queuing is irreversible; if the runtime knows about a feature gate at that address, it will activate it at the next epoch boundary. This means there is no recourse in the case of a mistaken queuing, discovery of a bug in the code wrapped by the feature-gate, or just a desire to manage the cadence and schedule of activations. A fully-fledged BPF program would take ownership of those accounts and support revoking queued features, giving engineers more flexibility and safeguards.
```

Author: Nice! I like it!

## Alternatives Considered

At this time, core contributors have not considered any viable alternative
solutions for enabling the ability to revoke pending feature activations. An
on-chain program was decided to be the optimally viable solution. Suggestions

> are welcome.

Reviewer: Instead of this paragraph, I would mention the alternative of making the Feature Gate program into a fully fledged native program, with the big drawback that any changes to the program would need to be implemented by all validator clients in coordination.

The contributor then places the code required for the runtime to activate the
feature behind a “feature gate” using the public key of the key pair. The
feature gate allows the runtime to check to make sure a specific account exists
at the address provided for the Feature ID before activating the feature with
the contributor’s code. 
An example can be found at the link below:

<https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/f4287d70bb78307f16949509e013fb5e6f15a751/runtime/src/bank.rs#L7885-L7889>

When the network reaches 95% of stake running the particular version of the
Solana runtime software containing the feature, and core contributors have
authorized the activation, the feature can be activated using the keypair and
the CLI command `solana feature activate`. 

This command will use the keypair to authorize a transaction that will allocate
the necessary data and assign it under owner
`Feature111111111111111111111111111111111111`. This account at
`Feature111111111111111111111111111111111111` does not exist, but is instead
used as a special address that is known to the Solana SDK. After this process
completes, the feature is scheduled for activation and will be activated at the

> next epoch boundary. 

Reviewer: I prefer a short summary in Motivation instead of this section. Also, since SIMDs are supposed to be implementation agnostic, we shouldn't include links to labs client code. The SIMD needs to stand alone.

### Deploying the Program

In order to deploy an upgradeable BPF program to the address at
`Feature111111111111111111111111111111111111`, a runtime change is required.
This change would allow the runtime, upon feature activation, to move an

> already deployed upgradeable BPF program in place of the non-existent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
already deployed upgradeable BPF program into the account at address
```

`Feature111111111111111111111111111111111111`.

> 
> For maximum security, the intial program that will be deployed and then moved
> in place of `Feature111111111111111111111111111111111111` will be a no-op
> program with an intentionally large allocation (to allow for larger programs
> in the future).

Reviewer: ```suggestion

For maximum security, the initial program can be a no-op
program with an intentionally large allocation (to allow for larger programs
in the future).
```

> Shortly after verifying this program was successfully moved into place, the
> program will be upgraded to contain Feature Gate Program v0.1.0 - which will
> include the "revoke functionality defined below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the program is moved into place, the program can be upgraded using the conventional BpfUpgradeableLoader method to include the revoke functionality defined below.
```

> The specific no-op program that will be initially deployed and moved by the
> runtime has been verifiably built and deployed to devent, testnet, and
> mainnet-beta. It can be found in the repository linked below.
> 
> <https://github.com/buffalojoec/noop-programs/tree/main/programs/feature-gate-noop>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The specific no-op program to be initially moved into `Feature111111111111111111111111111111111111` by the
runtime should be verifiably built and then deployed to devent, testnet, and
mainnet-beta.
```

Reviewer: Before we activate the feature gate to do the switch we can publish your repo link for examination by labs/jito/firedancer client teams and anyone else who wants to verify it.
But the SIMD is supposed to be generic.

The runtime change to perform this account replacement can be found in the pull
request linked below.

<https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/32783>

The feature tracking issue for this change can be found here:

> <https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/issues/33547>

Reviewer: Remove this stuff

### Revoking Pending Features

As mentioned above under “New Terminology”, the act of revoking a pending
feature activation consists of reallocating a feature account’s data to zero,
assigning it to the system program, and defunding its lamports balance. This
causes the feature account to be “revoked” since the runtime will no longer

> detect it as an account owned by `Feature11111`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
detect it as an account owned by `Feature111111111111111111111111111111111111`.
```

Reviewer: If you don't want to use the whole address everywhere, you could define the "Feature Program ID" somewhere up above?

Author: I tried this out but it honestly reads better with the full address.

When a core contributor executes the `solana feature activate` command, a

> signature from the feature key pair is required to activate it, since its state
> will change. Similarly, we can require the same feature key pair’s signature to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
signature from the feature keypair is required to activate it, since its state
will change. Similarly, we can require the same feature keypair’s signature to
```

Consider the instruction as it would appear in the Feature Gate Program:

```rust
pub enum FeatureGateInstruction {
    /// Revoke a pending feature activation.
    ///
    /// A "pending" feature activation is a feature account that has been
    /// allocated and assigned, but hasn't yet been updated by the runtime
    /// with an `activation_slot`.
    ///
    /// Features that _have_ been activated by the runtime cannot be revoked.
    ///
    /// Accounts expected by this instruction:
    ///
    ///   0. `[w+s]`    Feature account
    ///   1. `[w]`      Destination (for rent lamports)
    RevokePendingActivation,
}
```

When this instruction is invoked with the proper signature, the feature account
would be reallocated, defunded, and returned to the System Program, like so:

```rust
/* Checks */

let new_destination_lamports = feature_info
    .lamports()
    .checked_add(destination_info.lamports())
    .ok_or::<ProgramError>(FeatureGateError::Overflow.into())?;

**feature_info.try_borrow_mut_lamports()? = 0;
**destination_info.try_borrow_mut_lamports()? = new_destination_lamports;

feature_info.realloc(0, true)?;
feature_info.assign(&system_program::id());
```

> ### Governing the Program Upgrades

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Controlling Program Upgrades
```

> Upgrading the Feature Gate program will be controlled by a 2-of-3
> multi-signature authority, consisting of key-holders distributed across network
> participants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the Feature Gate program requires special runtime support, upgrading the Feature Gate program will initially be controlled by a 2-of-3
multi-signature authority, consisting of key-holders distributed across validator-client
teams.
```

- Solana Labs: 1 key-holder
- Jump: 1 key-holder
- Jito: 1 key-holder

Only when 2 out of 3 key-holders have authorized an upgrade will the Feature
Gate program be upgraded.

> **Note:** This includes the upgrade required to upgrade the initial no-op
> program to Feature Gate Program v0.1.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** This includes the upgrade required to upgrade the initial no-op
program to the first released Feature Gate Program supporting revoke.
```

## Impact

> 

Reviewer: Call out no change to activation process or timing?

Core contributors are positively impacted by this change, since the ability to
revoke pending feature activations is a significant security advantage.

However, anyone in the community - validators, developers, etc. - who *is not*
satisfied with the governance system outlined in this proposal may be
emotionally impacted and/or feel there is a risk of centralized authority

> around a piece of vital runtime functionality. 

Reviewer: Maybe rephrase to say that this SIMD provides more decentralized control over how feature gates work, but could be more decentralized in the future.

## Security Considerations

> Currently the accounts used for feature-gating are owned by an account that
> does not exists. This means that there’s no on-chain authority that can modify
> feature accounts once they’ve been created. This allows the runtime to
> confidently update their state upon activation.
> 
> With this proposal, a live BPF program - which can accept instructions from
> anyone and execute code - will be the owner of these accounts. Surely this
> provides significant risk if *both* the program’s processor code *and* its
> upgrade authority are not properly managed. 
> 
> With that being said, thoroughly reviewed and safe processor code, as well as
> a robust governance system for upgrading the program, will together mitigate
> these new risks as much as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently the accounts used for feature-gating are owned by an program id that
does not exist. This means that there’s no on-chain authority that can modify
feature accounts once they’ve been created. This allows the runtime to
confidently update their state upon activation.

With this proposal, a live BPF program - which can accept instructions from
anyone and execute code - will be the owner of these accounts. This
does create some risk if *both* the program’s processor code *and* its
upgrade authority are not properly managed.  But thoroughly reviewed and safe processor code, as well as
a decentralized system for upgrading the program, will together mitigate
these new risks as much as possible.
```
